People say, "Oh, Alzheimer's is genetic
garbage." That genetic component is only
5%. So that means 95% of Alzheimer's
risk is environmental air pollution,
microlastics,
ultrarocessed food. And a paper just
came out showing that sweetener
consumption correlates with dementia.
And we think we know why.
>> And you've not talked about this
publicly yet.
>> No. Let's talk.
>> Dr. Robert Lustig is a worldleading
sugar expert
>> who's teaching the world how to reclaim
their health from the industry that
profits off your vulnerabilities.
>> 73% of the items in the American grocery
store are poison because sugar is hidden
in all the foods. For instance, there's
262 names for sugar and the food
industry uses all of them because they
knew when they add it, you buy more. But
the problem is it's providing people
with a dopamine hit and that dopamine is
addictive and that's when you actually
have a biochemical and medical problem.
And we have data to show that
ultrarocessed food has been associated
with dementia, diabetes, cancer, every
single mental health disease. So the
question is, how can you buy healthy
food and not be tempted by the bad
stuff? So the first, if a food has a
label, it's a warning label. The second
thing, if any food has a sugar in the
first three ingredients, it's dessert.
And then when they go to the store,
don't go hungry.
>> And what about exercise?
>> Well, it doesn't really impact your
desire to reach for sugar. It has its
own metabolic benefits, but if you think
exercise is going to make you lose
weight, you are deluded. And we can talk
about that.
>> So, with all of this in mind, if I've
got a sugar problem or if I got an
addiction problem, what is the remedy?
>> I will tell you that this is one of the
things I did in my obesity clinic. So,
the only way you're going to be able to
fix the problem is
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way, you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you
>> Dr. Robert. Good to have you back.
>> Oh, my pleasure. I am particularly
fascinated by this term hostage brain. I
know you're in the early stages of
working on a book about this subject,
but for anyone that doesn't understand.
So, when I look at this word the hostage
brain, I think of all the times that
I've been out of control. And when I say
out of control, I'm going to let you
define it, but when I say out of
control, I mean there's so many things I
want to do as it relates to my health,
my fitness, other aspects of my life,
whether it's avoiding eating the cookie
at 2 a.m. in a hotel room somewhere, or
other areas of my life where I want to
have greater elements of control. What
does what do you mean by the hostage
brain?
>> All of us want to be in control,
Stephen. I mean, it's the nature of
humanity. We want to be in control. We
want to be in control of our lives.
Unfortunately, many of us want to be in
control of everyone else's lives as
we've seen play out on grand stages
lately. Okay? Everyone wants to be in
control. And the reason we want to be in
control is because then we can mitigate
threat. When you're in control, then
threat is low because you're in control.
Problem is, we're not in control.
The more in control, the more a specific
area of your brain is basically glomming
on. And that area of the brain is known
as the amygdala. The amygdala is your
fear center. It's also your 24-hour
sentry. But really what the amygdala is,
it's the point guard on your basketball
team. Okay? So, it surveys the entire
court, sees the offense and the defense,
and has to make split-second decisions
who's going to score. Now, a lousy point
guard takes all the shots. A good point
guard passes off to the guy who has the
best shot. A great point guard is going
to be able to figure out if he's going
to score or if he's going to pass it off
to somebody else. If you're in control,
okay, your level of threat goes down.
But really, your control is an illusion.
You really don't have control. And the
more you try to exert it,
the more you realize you're not in
control. And what that does is that
generates an enormous amount of stress
and anor enormous amount of pain.
Now that pain can turn inward and we
call that depression
and right now 29% of Americans are
depressed and 4.4% of the entire world
is depressed. These numbers were
infinite decimal a generation ago and
they are basically you know just you
know pushing up further and further and
the reason is because of this
inappropriate illusion of control and
it's causing an enormous amount of pain.
How do you mllify that pain?
How do you basically deal with the
psychological pain of lack of control
that you yourself put upon yourself?
Well, we have loads of ways. Cocaine,
amphetamine, nicotine, alcohol, sugar,
gambling, uh uh social media, internet
gaming, uh pornography. Pick your
poison. That's dopamine.
Dopamine basically
provides you with a little bit of
pleasure on top of a whole lot of pain.
The problem is that dopamine is
addictive.
And so when you apply a set of pleasures
to try to deal with your pain of lack of
control, that puts you into a never-
ending cycle of consumption and misery.
That's the hostage brain. What do I need
to understand about dopamine in order to
because I think sometimes awareness is
step one in being able to do something
about a problem that you might have. So
what do I need to understand about what
dopamine is and what it's doing in my
brain and how it's sort of associated
with addiction to then be able to do
something about it which I consider step
two.
>> So dopamine basically has two functions.
The first is learning. There's no
learning without dopamine.
Anytime you learn something, whether
it's positive or negative, it's because
there was a dopamine release. When you
put your hand down on a hot stove when
you were three years old and went, "Ah,
I'm never doing that again." Okay? That
was dopamine that did that. Okay? And
what it did was it went to your amydala
and it rewired it.
That was a rewiring of your amydala due
to the excitatory
neuro stimulus of that dopamine
affecting an area of your brain called
the basilateral amydala.
Okay? And it laid down and it set up a
circuit and that circuit is still
working in you right now. Okay? So
dopamine is the learning
neurotransmitter.
It can be for negative learning. It can
be for positive learning. Either way,
>> dopamine is also when it's going to
another area of the brain called the
nucleus encumbent which is the reward
center.
That is
a stimulus for reward. That is the
motivation for reward.
That is in
one word foreplay.
Okay? That is the excitement,
the reason for continuing any given
behavior.
Okay? You get both out of dopamine.
Okay? And in short, small bursts in the
right venue.
That's how we navigate life. We navigate
it through learning and we navigate it
through reward.
You can't do it without dopamine.
Dopamine is good unless it's bad. And as
you know, everything in science is both
good and bad. The problem is chronic
overstimulation of any neuron leads to
neuronal cell death. Dopamine is a
chronic stimulator. And so if you have
chronic dopamine being released,
what's going to happen is you're going
to kill the next neuron.
Now that neuron doesn't want to die. So
it downregulates the receptors for
dopamine so that it's less likely that
one dopamine over here is going to find
a receptor over here to bind to because
there are fewer of them. So what this
means is more and more for less and
less. And we call that phenomenon
tolerance. More dopamine, more
tolerance. So the law of diminishing
returns. M.
>> So you get a hit, you get a rush.
>> Could be a sugar, alcohol, whatever it
might be. Pornography. Yeah.
>> Pick your poison. Doesn't matter. You
get a hit, you get a rush, receptors go
down. Next time you need a bigger hit to
get the same rush, receptors go down.
And then you need a bigger hit and a
bigger hit and a bigger hit until
finally you get a huge hit to get
nothing. That's called tolerance. And
then when the neurons actually start to
die, that's called addiction.
So tolerance is the start of addiction.
And the problem is more dopamine, more
tolerance, more tolerance, more
addiction.
>> So people that are getting addicted to
unhealthy foods and sugars and those
kinds of things, what's like going on in
their brain? So, at first, the first
time they taste it, you know, whatever
it is, whether it's a uh a Froot Loop or
a, you know, a candy corn or um you
know, Frappuccino or, you know, pick
your uh pick your poison. Um you you get
this big, you know, sort of, you know,
sugar bomb going off in your head and
you go, "Wow, this is great." You know,
I want some more of this down the whole
Frappuccino. Okay. And what you've done
is you've basically hit your nucleus
incumbent with a big slug of dopamine
and you go, "Wow, that was great." And
then an hour later it's gone. And then
you go, "God, I need that again." Okay.
So the first time you got it, you liked
it. The second time you did it, you
wanted it. And the third time you needed
it. So that's the difference between
liking and wanting and needing. Okay?
Because liking we all do and no one
wants to take away liking. Wanting gets
into problems because you can over abuse
things. Needing is when you actually
have a biochemical and medical problem.
So with all of this in mind, if I've got
a sugar problem or if I've got an
addiction problem, I'm addicted to
insert poison.
What is what is the the remedy? Just
avoid it for a while and then if that is
the remedy, what what's going on in my
brain? Is it fixing itself?
>> There are many remedies, okay? And they
can all be used in conjunction with each
other. Uh ultimately, the only thing
that's going to work is getting those
dopamine receptors back up. Remember I
told you dopamine downregulates its own
receptor. The only way you're going to
be able to fix the problem is for the
dopamine receptors to come back up.
There's a a uh a uh trend going on right
now out in Silicon Valley you may have
heard of called dopamine fasting.
>> Ah okay.
>> Yeah you've heard the word.
>> You basically people lock themselves up
in a hotel room for three weeks. Okay.
don't take a shower and um you know
basically you know take the TVs out of
the room and um you know try to commune
with uh themselves and with nature with
no stimuli with no external stimuli in
order to bring their dopamine receptors
back up. It's particularly true of
cocaine addicts because their dopamine
receptors are way down because after all
cocaine is a dopamine reuptake
inhibitor. So, it's flooding the zone
with dopamine. Therefore, those
receptors are, you know, down in the
sewer.
Now, do you have to be that severe? No,
of course not. But does it work? Takes
three weeks. You want to do it for 3
weeks? Yeah. Then it works. Other ways,
you know, you can wean yourself off. You
can do abstinence.
And if you if you can do abstinence,
that's a good idea. hard to do,
especially when it's, you know, staring
at you and when it's available 247, 365
like sugar is, you know, it's
everywhere. It's on every street corner.
>> When I when I fast or when I do the
ketogenic diet,
>> I lose my apparent cravings.
>> That's right. Exactly right.
>> And the reason is because no sugar in in
a ketogenic diet. So, you're basically
removing the offensive stimulus.
>> I was so shocked. I love those cinnamon
roll things. Not that I I probably one
every two years, but I love them
nonetheless. I'm like a big admirer,
even though we don't have a relationship
anymore.
>> And I when I did the ketogenic diet for
about I was on I was 4 weeks in of not
having any sugar and or carbohydrates.
And I walked up to this concession in
Cape Town with these all these amazing
cinnamon rolls. They're like
specialists. And I looked at them and
there was zero part of my brain that was
interested in any of it. Zero part of my
brain. And I was like, "Wow, my brain
has been like rewired or something
>> just because I've removed sugar from my
diet."
>> Yeah,
>> it happens. Uh it but it takes a while.
>> It's not something that you know you can
turn on and off.
>> It takes a a fair amount of time. I will
tell you that um you know this is one of
the things I did in my obesity clinic
you know on a daily basis was getting
people off their sugar addiction
>> and sometimes you have to basically
babysit them. you have to, you know,
work with them and with work with their
parents in order to, you know, basically
turn over the entire pantry because the
sugar is hidden in all the foods, you
know, I mean, it's it's uh there 262
names for sugar and the food industry
uses all of them. This is why we are
trying to get sugar addiction and
ultrarocessed food addiction codified by
the WHO and by the American Psychiatric
Association as a bonafide um diagnosis
so that we can get remediation and
therap therapy for people.
>> One of the things that was one of the
most popular parts of our conversation
last time, Robert, was there was a
section where we talked about the
different types of sugar and diet cokes
and coke zeros and all these kinds of
things.
You know, I if I can see a couple of
cans on the desk over there where where
Jack is um in the darkness that I can
vaguely see. And these cans of fizzy
drink, they all have some kind of sugar
substitute.
>> Yep.
>> Are those sugar substitutes harmless?
>> No, of course not. Um a paper just came
out like three days ago in animals of
neurology uh basically showing that uh
uh non-nutritive sweetener consumption
so diet sweetener consumption uh
correlates with dementia
and we think we know why
>> why
>> reactive oxygen species so oxygen
radicals uh little chemicals that are
given off from various substances that
cause changes in energy metabolism in
cells and also cause damage in cells. R
O's reactive oxygen species the famous
ones are spartame and sucralose.
Now do monk fruit extract do stevia does
alulose also cause reactive oxygen
species? I very specifically looked for
data on those could not find it. But for
spartame and for sucralose, the two
biggest ones that are available today,
the ones that are used in a lot of diet
drinks, huge amounts of ROS generation,
>> reactive oxygen species generation. So,
anything that generates ROS's
contributes to u dementia.
>> Is the evidence strong at this stage?
Yeah, it's pretty darn strong. I'm
actually giving a talk about this next
week in San Diego.
>> I heard you've got a a new theory on the
causes of Alzheimer's dementia that's
somewhat linked. This is it.
>> This is it. Yeah.
>> Can you explain that to me? And you've
you've not talked about this publicly
yet. You're set to talk about it in a
couple of days, I hear.
>> Uh let me uh take it back a step. Okay.
There's this organel inside our brains
called mitochondria. You've heard of
mitochondria?
>> Yeah. for the for your audience.
Mitochondria are the little energy
burning factories inside each of our
cells. What they do is they take food
energy and turn it into the chemical
energy that your cell can actually use
to power itself.
Okay? And that chemical energy has a
name. It's called ATP. Now, if you took
biology in high school, you've heard of
ATP, adenazine triphosphate. The energy
is in the phosphate bonds. So ATP
will give up its energy and go to ADP
diphosphate which will then give up its
energy and go to AM monofhosphate which
will then finally go to adenazine
and adenazine binds to the adenazine
receptor and makes you go to sleep.
>> Mhm. By the way, that's where caffeine
works. It blocks the adenazine receptor
keeping you awake so that the adenazine
can't bind to the adenazine receptor.
Okay, so that ATP
is the currency of the cell. That's what
makes the cell run.
Anything that depletes ATP
is going to put the cell at risk.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. Because it doesn't have the energy
it needs to run.
>> Yeah. It's like it's gasoline.
>> It's like gasoline. So what happens when
you start running out of gasoline?
>> Well, you break down.
>> You'll break down.
So brain fog,
difficulty concentrating,
irritability
and ultimately all the way to
depression. So the amount of ATP within
any given neuron
is the approximate cause of neuronal
dysfunction that we see as
neurocognitive and neurobbehavioral
change. Now,
how do mitochondria and how do ROS's fit
into this?
Mitochondria make ATP,
but every time they make ATP, they make
also make ROS's. There are 11 steps in
mitochondria and they all give off
ROS's. Now, those ROS's are going to
damage the cell. They have to be gotten
rid of. They're like toxic fumes. They
got to be gotten rid of. And so we have
a pathway in each cell of our body to
get rid of the toxic ROS's. Okay,
they're called antioxidants
like glutathione, vitamin E, vitamin C,
host of other uh flavonoids. Okay, those
basically quench those reactive oxygen
species. They go to die.
If you do that, then the ROS's basically
just get funneled away and all is well
and the cell can keep working. But if
for some reason those antioxidants
aren't up to par, if for instance you
being eating ultrarocessed food and you
can't make your antioxidant compliment,
then the ROS's feed back and what
happens is the ROS's are basically
telling the cell, hey, you're shunting
too much energy down this pathway
because I can't clear them. So there's
too much stuff. So
shut it down. And so what happens is
that instead of funneling the glucose
into the mitochondria to generate more
ATP, it diverts it and it goes off into
other directions like glycogen which is
in the brain is not good or fat which is
even worse.
And bottom line your cell is now not
energy producing like it used to be. It
has now been reduced in terms of its
energy capacity.
What's that going to do? That's going to
reduce ATP generation.
Okay, that's step one. Now, step two,
there's this stuff called cortisol.
Cortisol comes from stress. Cortisol
comes from sleep deprivation. Cortisol
comes from exogenous gluccocorticoids
like steroids being given to people for
you know autoimmune disease or for uh
you know uh other uh uh ill illnesses.
Okay, that cortisol causes neurons to
increase in um metabolism causes them to
burn energy faster.
Okay, so you now you have an increased
ATP utilization. So you have a decreased
ATP generation. Now you have an
increased ATP utilization.
Now you've got an energy crisis inside
each cell. Now your ATP can't keep up
with the needs of the cell. And when
that happens, now you've got symptoms,
whether it's brain fog or irritability
or all the way to frank depression.
Okay. Now, step three.
There are these proteins inside each
neuron called amaloid precursor peptide
A.
Okay, it's a normal protein in all
cells. Every cell in your body has AP.
It needs to stay in solution
and in order for it to stay in solution,
it energy has to be applied to it in
order to keep it in solution. The minute
the ATP in the cell goes down, they come
out of solution and they start forming
um aggregates which we call plaques.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. And those plaques damage the cell
which then start an inflammatory process
uh in the cells next door called the
microglea in order to clean up the
process. And now you've got plaques and
an inflammation and now you've got
neuronal cell death.
That's dementia.
So it starts with an ATP energy crisis,
moves through
plaque and inflammation to generate
neuronal cell death. Well, this is
problematic to say the least. And by the
way, anything that generates ROS's has
been associated with Alzheimer's.
Anything that increases ATP utilization
like stress, gluccocorticoids, fever,
autoimmune disease also increases
Alzheimer's. So, anything that increases
step one, anything that increases step
two ultimately leads to increased step
three and Alzheimer's. So to simplify
this in a couple of sentences for
someone that has no scientific
understanding and we're going to have to
cut a few corners here scientifically in
order to to for them to have a framework
to understand it. How would you give me
some sort of an analogy for it maybe in
the context of I guess a petrol station
and a car?
>> Yeah. So I mean if we're basically doing
petrol we're talking energy only.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So bottom line
your car runs on petrol.
>> Mhm. Okay, the petrol comes in, that's
the glucose, and the engine, okay,
powers pistons, and the pistons then
power an axle.
>> And the axle then powers wheels, and you
go.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. But there are a lot of things that
have to go right for all of those things
to happen.
Like for instance, your energy the the
the gasoline has to get into the engine
in the first place. What if you have
carbon deposits on your intake
manifolds? And if you have a problem
with any one of those steps, you're
going to end up
with a jalapy instead of a sports car.
>> I mean, that's what we're seeing in the
United States. Over 7 million Americans
live with Alzheimer's, and this is
expected to double to almost 13 million
in the coming decades. Indeed it
>> because we haven't solved the problem.
>> That's the mechanism. What is what is
the cause?
>> Right? So we know we know that the cause
is environmental.
Now people say oh Alzheimer's is genetic
garbage. There is a genetic component to
Alzheimer's. I'm not arguing that. There
is. Okay. This is thing called APOE E4.
And if you have two copies of APOE E4 on
your genome, your risk for getting
Alzheimer's is nine times the general
population. That is absolutely true. I
don't disagree with that. So APOE4 is
not a good thing. I'm not arguing that.
Once upon a time in, you know, uh,
evolution, having two copies of ApoE4
was good because it meant you got fat up
to your brain pretty fast. But we don't
need that right now. That's kind of a an
an old old news kind of pro of issue.
People who have double doses of APOE4
are at higher risk. There is absolutely
no question about that. But they can
mitigate that risk if they change their
diet. Okay? they can eat a very lowfat
diet and res and improve their risk down
to the general population.
Okay?
Everything else in Alzheimer's is not
genetic. By the way, that genetic
component is only 5% of all Alzheimer's.
So that means 95% of Alzheimer's risk is
environmental. Now the question is what
in the environment?
Well, air pollution,
ionizing radiation,
microlastics.
Okay, there's nothing you can do about
any one of those three.
That's baked into the cake. You can't do
anything about those today.
What other things? Uh, sleep disordered
breathing, medications,
ultrarocessed food.
Okay, what about ultrarocessed food?
Fructose, my favorite, you know, hobby
horse, you know, the sweet molecule and
sugar. Low omega-3s,
so no, you know, fish, uh, eggs,
chicken,
uh, lack of fiber because fiber
suppresses inflammation.
Presence of emulsifiers.
Okay. B vitamins, lack of B vitamins,
particularly B6, B12, folate.
Okay, those things are all associated
with an increase in reactive oxygen
species.
You can manage those, you can mitigate
those
thereby increasing mitochondrial
function, increasing ATP generation and
preventing that cellular energy crisis
so that you don't end up behind the
eightball and you don't lose your
neurons.
>> When people tell me that Alzheimer's is
associated with having a sort of energy
crisis in the brain,
>> Mhm.
>> I'm increasingly hearing people talk
about ketones. It's just it's remarkable
the improvement in cognitive performance
that I feel when I'm fasted or I'm in a
ketogenic diet. Whereas if I'm in a if
I've been eating a lot of uh
carbohydrates
>> or sugar,
>> it's like my brain is like like
backfiring. Yeah. It's stumbling over
itself.
>> I'm not surprised.
You know, the the food industry tells
you, well, carbohydrates are energy.
Actually, that's not true. Carbohydrates
inhibit energy production.
>> How do you mean?
>> So there's this thing called a bomb
calorimeter and there's this thing
called a mitochondria.
>> They are not the same. A bomb
calorimeter, you throw food into the
bomb calorimeter, it explodes and it
gives off heat. Okay, there's, you know,
captures the heat, measures the heat.
And that's how we know, for instance,
fat burns at 9 calories per gram.
Protein burns at four calories per gram.
Carbohydrate burns at four calories per
gram. Which is why fat is more energy
dense than protein or carbohydrate,
which is how we all determine that fat
made you fat.
>> And the bomb calorimeter is also how
they determine if a bag of crisps or
chips or whatever you call it here is
200 calories. Because if you put them in
there
>> Exactly.
>> it will release 200 calories of energy.
>> Right. Because a calorie is that amount
of energy that raises one gram of water
one degree centigrade.
>> Okay.
>> So it is a measure of physics.
>> It's a measure of heat generation.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Mitochondria are not bomb
calorimeters.
They are not capturing heat. They are
giving off heat. They are capturing ATP.
No bomb calerimeter captures ATP.
Mitochondria capture and generate ATP.
Mhm.
>> Now, turns out 35 to 40% of what
mitochondria generate turns out to be
heat. That's why you have a body
temperature
>> is from that. And so you have ne you
will never have a 100% energy efficient
mitochondrian because if you did, okay,
you would have a temp body temperature
of, you know, room temperature, okay,
and you'd be dead. That's not the way it
works. Bottom line,
that transfer of food energy to chemical
energy losses energy in the process.
Okay? The bomb calorimeter can't tell
the difference, but your mitochondria
can. Ultimately, it's how efficient are
your mitochondria at converting food
energy to ATP.
The bomb calorimeter can't tell you
anything about that.
So
these two phenomena, you know, the
concept of calories as fuel and the
concept of calories as generators of ATP
have really very little to do with each
other. And it turns out that there are
individual things in food, the famous
one is fructose, but there are others,
lectins and others that actually inhibit
the mitochondrial generation of ATP. So
they actually inhibit your ability to
turn food energy into chemical energy.
If that's the case, even if they have
calories per gram in a bomb calorimeter,
if they're interfering with
mitochondrial function,
are they food?
What is the definition of food?
Substrate that contributes either to
growth or burning of an organism. Well,
I just told you fructose actually
inhibits
burning. Turns out fructose also
inhibits growth. It inhibits cortical
bone growth, tbacular bone growth,
cancellous bone growth. Bottom line,
people who eat ultrarocessed food end up
shorter.
We have the data for that. So if a
substrate that passes your lips does not
contribute to growth and does not
contribute to burning, is it a food?
>> I guess not.
>> What is it then? It's a poison.
>> And how much of our diet do you think is
poison? I think
>> fair amount.
>> Ultrarocessed food is loaded with them.
Real food is not loaded with them. You
can still find them, but not loaded with
them. Ultrarocessed food has in my
opinion, okay, five things wrong with
it. Too much sugar, which poisons your
mitochondria. Not enough fiber, which is
necessary to suppress inflammation.
Not enough omega-3 fatty acids, which
are necessary to build your brain and
conduct neurotransmission. Too many
emulsifiers, which leads to gut
inflammation and therefore systemic
inflammation. And then we can throw on
top of that the food dyes and food
additives which are mutagenic because
they're, you know, petroleum based.
That's ultrarocessed food. Ultrarocessed
food has been associated with every
single one of these diseases, including
every single mental health disease,
especially dementia. As we now have
seen, ultrarocessed food is specifically
associated with dementia. And even diet
sweeteners are associated with dementia
through this reactive oxygen species
pathway.
>> The sugar industry can't be your biggest
fan.
>> They're not.
I'm trying to help them though, you
know. I am trying to help them. Last
year um not too long after we had our uh
previous uh uh uh session uh I was the
uh keynote speaker at the fourth
international sugar reduction summit in
Atlanta, Georgia,
you know, Daniel in the lion's den.
And you know like why would they invite
me? I am you know I'm their conscience.
I said I told them I said I don't want
to be your enemy. I want to be your
conscience. I want you to do the right
thing. Okay? Ultimately, look,
ultrarocessed food is not going away. As
much as I would like it to, it's not
going to go away. And I'm not even sure
we want it to go away because we got to
feed 10 billion people by the year 2050.
And we're not going to have enough land
and ocean to do it. Ultimately,
ultrarocessed food is here to stay. It
is baked into the cake.
But
the question is, can we make
ultrarocessed food healthy?
Right now, they're not. Right now,
what's going on in the US, you know, uh,
food industry is doing the exact
opposite. It's making food disastrously
disease producing. The question is,
could you change that? And the answer is
yes, you can. In fact, we've done it. We
have been doing it. Um, five years ago,
I started working with an offshore food
company, Gratus, by the way. No money
changed hands. And so, they came to me
and they said, "Look, we know we're part
of the problem. We want to be part of
the solution. We know that Kuwait has an
18% diabetes rate and an 80% obesity
rate, and we don't want to be the
reason. We want to be the help.
Can you help us
figure out how to make metabolically
healthy processed food?
So I convened a uh scientific advisory
team of five members and we worked for
the next three years. Looked at every
single pro process, every procedure,
every uh vendor, every ingredient, every
product. Sent them all for biochemical
analysis
to figure out what's going into the
food, what's coming out of the food. Is
the food metabolically healthy? What has
to be done? How does it need to be
re-engineered
to lead to something that is
metabolically healthy? And we came up
with a set of principles which we
published in Frontiers in Nutrition in
2023. We call it the metabolic matrix.
And we basically collapsed it down to
nine words. Three clauses, nine words.
Protect the liver, feed the gut, support
the brain.
That's it. Those three things, any thing
that passes your lips that protects the
liver, feeds the gut, supports the
brain, is healthy, whether it's
ultrarocessed or not. Anything that
passes your lips that does none of the
three is poison whether it's
ultrarocessed or not. So, it's actually
not the ultrarocessing,
it's whether or not it contributes to
metabolic health.
So then we started re-engineering
products on in the KDDD line and they
have 180 items in their portfolio. We
have re-engineered
10% of them, 18 products to become
metabolically healthy and we have tested
them on people in Kuwait to demonstrate
their metabolic benefit.
>> What is
>> and they are on the shelves now. But
isn't there is there a trade-off there
because those products might sell worse
now that they you've removed the the
stuff that makes them addictive?
>> No.
>> So, we didn't tell the public that we
were doing this. We just did it and they
just re they just introduced them to the
public and didn't tell them and they
didn't miss a freaking beat in terms of
sales and in terms of profits.
But I mean, tell them and it works.
>> Logically though, the the bad stuff
often makes the food more addictive.
>> And that's why this is so cool. It
didn't change consumption and it didn't
change profits.
And that's what they care about
ultimately. They don't care if
consumption changes as long as profits
don't. This can be done by other food
industries.
We're trying to get them on board. And
you know, I have lots to say about RFK,
but he has at least uh uh convened a
discussion on what's wrong with
ultrarocessed food, and we're hoping to
be able to enter that uh enter that
conversation.
>> RFK is the health leader, I guess,
>> head of head of health and human
services here in the United States.
>> You have a lot to say about him. I have
boatloads to say about him, most of
which uh you can't print.
>> What's what's your general opinion of of
him in his role in what he's doing, etc.
>> I have been asked to serve in this
administration four times and I've said
no each time.
And it's not because I don't want to be.
I do. But it's because my opinion and
his opinion would basically get me
thrown out after about 5 seconds.
>> What's the difference?
>> I wouldn't last. I wouldn't last. I
wouldn't last a second.
>> What's the difference in opinion?
>> All right. F RFK has five buckets in his
portfolio.
Food, I'm on board.
Pharma transparency,
I'm on board.
Chemicals in the environment,
Water fluidation,
I'm partially on board.
You could get the fluoride out of the
water, but first you got to get the
sugar out of the food. You can't just
take the fluoride out of the water or
everybody will get Mountain Dew mouth
all at the same time. And that would be
a complete and utter disaster. Has to be
done in a coordinated public health PSA
driven campaign with everyone on board,
including the food industry and the
medical profession and government.
>> And to explain that, there's fluoride in
the water in the United States because
there's so much sugar. There's so much
sugar in the food. You wouldn't need
fluoride in the water if you didn't have
sugar in the food.
>> Just explain this. So, the United States
put fluoride in the water
>> to stop dental carries
>> which protects people's teeth,
>> which protects people's teeth. The point
is that only half the countries in the
world have fluoride in the water. The
others don't. And the reason is because
they don't have sugar in the food. The
only reason you need to put the fluoride
in the water is because the sugar in the
food causes the dental carries. Now the
fluoride reduces the uh uh prevalence of
dental carries by about 30 to 40%.
>> dental carries
>> cavities
>> by about 30 to 40%. Now the problem with
fluoride is at high dose
it can be a neurotoxin.
Now the goal is for uh public fluidation
to stay way below that. Now do they?
Not really. Sometimes they go above. So
normal fluoride concentrations when
you're doing it as a uh you know public
health effort should be between.3 and
0.9 parts per million. Sometimes it goes
up to 1.5 parts per million and at 1.5
it becomes a neurotoxin.
So, it's a purely dose issue, but one of
the reasons why people are screaming
about getting fluoride out of the water
is because it can be a neurotoxin. It's
not supposed to be in doses that are
appropriate,
but you know,
people don't look at the data. Point is,
you could get the fluoride out of the
water, but if you got the fluoride out
of the water and didn't take the sugar
out of the food, you know, we'd have
more dental carries, we'd have more
anesthesas, we'd have more teeth
pulling, we'd have more sepsis, we'd
have more dental abscesses, we'd have
more soldiers dying in the field. It's a
matter of national security. So, you
can't just do it. It requires a, you
know, coordinated uh uh effort. Is there
anything else you would disagree with
him on?
>> And then finally, bucket number five,
vaccines.
I am a pediatrician.
I am not a vaccine expert to be sure. I
am not an immunologist to be sure, but I
am a pediatrician and I know a lot about
vaccines and I know a lot about the
infectious diseases that those vaccines
were set up to basically prevent.
And I have taken care of all eight of
the diseases that we have child
immunizations for. MS, measles, rebella,
dtheria, ptus, tetanus, h flu, polio.
I've taken care of all eight of those.
And I will tell you right now, when I
take care of those, it's because of
someone who didn't get vaccinated. And
when I take care of those, okay, the
chances are 90% that that kid's going to
die.
RFK has not RFK says he can tell whether
someone has mitochondrial function
dysfunction just by looking at them. I'm
a mitochondria.
I can't.
Ultimately RFK's view of vaccines is um
shall we say his and his alone and is
not shared by the medical community. Um,
and I will not be part and parcel to
3,000 measles deaths
because of a uh uh a blanket uh disdain
for uh vaccines and vaccine technology
which has worked beautifully to save 154
million people on this earth over the
last 50 years.
>> Yeah. You know, I don't I don't talk
about this stuff a lot. Um, but
I was
I'm pretty sure at least one of my
siblings was saved by vaccination when
we were in Africa and we had uh malaria.
I think if I'm if I'm if I'm accurate
here, I had malaria, my brothers had
malaria,
>> and I think I was the one that didn't
get the malaria vaccine and then I ended
up in hospital as a at a very young age
with with malaria. I was like
hallucinating and stuff like that. Um.
Mhm.
>> And obviously as a as someone that was
born in Africa,
>> I think you probably have a clearer
understanding of the role that vaccines
can play in in good health. You know,
it's it's it's um it's quite concerning
because when you speak to any scient
like all of the majority of the leading
scientists, they're very extremely pro
provaccine.
But
>> we we've seen both sides. We've seen
what happens when there's no vaccine and
we've seen what happens when there is
vaccine.
>> And this is not to say that there can be
side effects to vaccines. Um the vaccine
manufacturers and scientists talk about
those side effects as well. But the the
thing that I think people should focus
on is the net um good that vaccines have
done for for the last centuries in
eradicating illnesses and avoiding um
disease.
And and my concern just to close off on
this point is my concern is if there is
to be some kind of outbreak
>> Mhm.
>> anytime soon. We're in such a cloud of
misinformation around vaccines that I I
worry people might make the wrong
decisions. Interestingly, there was a
measles outbreak in Texas recently and
RFK at one point did eventually prompt
the federal deployment of MM MMR
vaccines and expressed support for them
um because there was a big outbreak of
measles in in Texas very recently.
>> I'm going to tell you something now that
I have not talked about in public. I had
uh a half an hour with RFK on the phone
one-on-one back in December of 2024
after the Trump uh uh election and RFK
was starting to convene his uh team and
I was asked to join it and so I got a
half hour with him and I will relate to
you now
for your public so that they understand
what that conversation entailed.
basically two threads. By the way, we're
supposed to talk about food. We didn't
talk about food. We talked about
vaccines. And here were the two threads.
First thread,
there are three
papers in the medical literature that
say that vaccines do more harm than
good.
And he quoted them at me. And I wrote
them down. And I went and looked them up
afterwards. And indeed they say what he
says they said
that it's unconscionable that
vaccines do more harm than good and
we're giving them to newborns.
Now it is true that those three papers
do say this. There are 50,000 that say
opposite. Okay. Second thing he said a
woman gives birth to a healthy baby.
that healthy baby gets a shot under the
skin and now that baby is not healthy
anymore.
That's a tort,
a legal tor. Okay? And you know, in
fact, you could argue that that is a in
fact a legal tor because you know duty
uh uh ne negligence you know all the way
down to damages. Okay. What's the
recommend what's the uh the remedy for
tort? I said lawsuit. He says, "Right,
but that mom can't sue because of the
Vaccine Indemnification Act of 1986.
So that mom basically has a damaged baby
and no recourse. That's
unconstitutional."
Those were the two threads of our
halfhour discussion.
No,
everything he said is absolutely true
and irrelevant.
They demonstrate basically confirmation
bias.
And he's a lawyer. He believes in
precedent. I'm a doctor. I believe in
probability.
There's always a risk benefit ratio
unless you're a lawyer in which case
there's only risk. And that's how he
sees the world. He sees the world as
risk.
I don't I wouldn't have lasted 5
seconds. I think we're both on the same
page in terms of making sure people have
the right information as it relates to
probability. We, you know, everything we
do in our life is a factor of
probability. Whether I got in a taxi to
come here this morning. I I understood
the probability of that taxi crashing
into another car, but I decided to get
in the car and come here anyway. we all
deal with these, you know, risks every
single day. I want to say on this on
this point of of vaccines that um
there's obviously it's almost it's
become quite a political issue and
there's two there's two sides and you
know one side which is more of the RFK
side is incredibly skeptical um
>> and
and they have their opinion then there's
the other side which tends to be
dominated more by the science scientists
if I interview scientists a lot so I
know that pretty much everyone I've
interviewed that's a scientist would
agree that um you know there's there are
side effects but net net vaccines um are
very positive.
>> Uh it it depends on how you look at it.
Okay. If you look at it at a at through
a public health lens
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. The vaccines do more good than
harm. And
>> and if you look at it from a purely
individual lens,
then you say, "Wait a second. I didn't
get the disease, but I got the shot and
I have a vaccine injury. Therefore, I
have been subjected to a tort." I would
just like to close the section by
telling people that if there is a a
health crisis in the near future, some
kind of viral outbreak like we saw with
the pandemic, to make sure you get your
information from sources that are highly
credible and those sources should not
include um they should not include
frankly they should not include
podcasts.
>> No, they should
>> they should not include social media.
They should in they should include
places like I'd recommend checking out a
website called Consensus. So I have no
affiliation with them, but consensus
allows you to type in a question you
have about health vaccines, whatever it
might be. And it shows you what the um
sort of peer-reviewed studies say um and
what the consensus is. So for example, I
was I was using the website a couple of
days ago to try and understand something
>> and I typed in does this partic is this
particular thing healthy or unhealthy
and it comes up with this bar the team
will show on the screen and it shows you
how much of the scientific research
supports that idea. here. So, it said
like 70% of the scientific research says
it was positive. It said 25% said it was
neutral and 5% said we kind of don't
know or um or negative. And I think
that's a really great tool because
there's so much information out there
and there's so many studies and there's
one study that says this and another
that says this. So, using tools like
that I think is a much better way to
make your health decisions than podcasts
like this or um Tik Toks or Instagrams
or tweets. Because another thing I want
to say is you might not know this and
I'm just speaking directly to my
audience here, but you're currently in
an algorithmic echo chamber. And if and
if you want to know what I mean by that
is the algorithm that you have on any of
your feeds has been personalized to give
you more of the stuff that either scares
you, frightens you, concerns you, etc.
And if you if you want to prove this, go
and ask your best friend or someone
else, a member of the public, to look at
their feed. I had really I remember
probably two years ago I asked my best
friend if I could just look at his
Twitter feed
>> and it was completely different from
mine. Yes, for one there was no
Manchester United and it was all
Liverpool but then all of the
information was completely different as
well and so we're living in these echo
chambers where misinformation or you
know things we believe is being
reinforced positively or negatively. So
you need a strategy for information
especially as it relates to health.
>> I couldn't agree more. The fact of the
matter is these algorithms are designed
to keep you engaged. They are not
designed to keep you informed.
>> It's just that simple. Um the other
problem of course is confirmation bias.
If you have confirmation bias, you will
only seek out the information that
reconfirms your bias.
>> And that's what's about to happen.
>> That's what we didn't used to have, but
that's what we have now. That's what's
about to play out in the comment section
whenever we talk about subjects like
like vaccines is um there'll be a group
of people who have their own opinions on
it and you're entitled to your own
opinion and they will go at war to
confirm and prove that opinion and
there'll be another group of people that
have a different opinion and they'll go
war to confirm that opinion. What I what
I love and hopefully what I think my
audience understand me for is I try and
I try and remain open minded and that's
like a really hard thing to do
these days
>> to do. Yeah.
>> I saw a journalist the other day. They
said they were trying to place me
politically and they said we think
Steven is apolitical. And I think that's
probably an apt description of my
opinions because I have
>> I would consider that a high compliment.
>> It's an amazing compliment. I have
views, but I don't sign up to any
particular
like cult is the way I'd describe it.
And and you know you're in a cult when
your views 99% represent the person
who's also in the cult because logically
that should never be the case.
>> That should never be the case. I agree.
Um you know cults are uh part and parcel
of uh society. Unfortunately
>> I've watched so many entrepreneurs treat
sales like a performance problem. when
it's often down to visibility. Because
when you can't see what's happening in
your pipeline, what stage each
conversation is at, what's stalled,
what's moving, you can't improve
anything and you can't close the deal.
Our sponsor, Pipe Drive, is the number
one CRM tool for small to medium
businesses. Not just a contact list, but
an actual system that shows your entire
sales process, end to end, everything
that's live, what's lagging, and the
steps you need to take next. All of your
teams can move smarter and faster. Teams
using Pipe Drive are on average closing
three times more deals than those that
aren't. It's the first CRM made by
salespeople for salespeople that over
100,000 companies around the world rely
on, including my team who absolutely
love it. Give Piperive a try today by
visiting piperive.com/ceo.
And you can get up and running in a
couple of minutes with no payment
needed. And if you use this link, you'll
get a 30-day free trial. I want to get
really practical tactical here with the
person that's listening right now and
they have me and you in their ears and
they know
that sugar is bad. They know
ultrarocessed food is bad. They still
are struggling with a little bit of fat,
other sort of diseases. They're probably
on the in on the trajectory to some form
of chronic disease, maybe Alzheimer's,
maybe dementia, maybe a form of cancer.
>> What do we have if we're talking direct?
Let's name her or him. Let's call her
Jenny. Jenny's listening right now.
Jenny and Dave. They're both sat there.
They're the average American.
What do we say to Jenny and Dave to get
them to
change their lives? The first thing that
you have to say to them is, "Who are
you?
Do you know? Do you know who you are?"
Because if they don't know who they are,
then nothing else is going to matter.
They have to be comfortable in their own
skin, and they're not.
The reason that they have glombmed on to
ultrarocessed food is it's providing
them
with a dopamine hit.
And it's probably the only thing that
even remotely gives them pleasure.
And if that's all the pleasure they get
in their lives,
you're never going to fix it because
that's all they've got. So the question
is
sorting your priorities
at at the at the individual level.
What's important to you? What's of
primary importance? Love, relationships.
What's of secondary importance?
Pleasure. food, drugs.
Okay? If you don't have any of the love
relationships stability
in your life, there's no amount of food
or drugs that's going to be able to make
up for that.
So, who are you? What is it that really
matters to you? And until you answer
that question honestly and
affirmatively, you're never going to get
past this. So, can let me role play as
Jenny and Dave. You've asked me who am
I. I am 30 years old and I work this
job. I don't job's okay. I don't love
it. It's not lighting me up. I'm single.
I'm living in this this city. And yeah,
I'm just, you know, trenling along kind
of like on the on the treadmill of life.
>> And how much stress are you under?
>> A lot of stress.
>> A whole lot of stress.
>> Every time I open my phone is stressful.
my emails, my work, there's this thing
going on with this person. I think my
mom's got a problem with this thing and
her health is deteriorating.
>> So, imagine what that's doing to the ATP
in your brain.
>> What's it doing?
>> It's depleting it like crazy. Number
one, you have mitochondrial dysfunction
from all the you ate and from the,
you know, unfortunately, from the uh air
pollution you've been breathing and from
the microplastics, you know, that have
basically taken over your brain. One
200th of your brain right now, Stephen,
is microplastics whether you like it or
not. So Jenny and Dave probably have
more. Okay. And you eat well. They
don't. All right. So here we are. This
is this is the the substrate. This is
the base. The question is, how are we
going to improve their ATP generation?
How are we going to improve their
mitochondrial function? How are we going
to get those their neurons to start
responding properly?
That's the question.
>> And do you aim at stress as part of the
solution?
>> Yes, of course you have to. How can you
not? Let me give you another uh quick
clinical vignette. Recently, I uh had
the opportunity to have a an extended
conversation with um a hero of mine, Dr.
Vivic Murthy, who was the former surgeon
general of the United States. and we
were in London together and I finally
sat him down and I said, you know,
Vivic, I love your, you know, uh,
espousing of love that we ultimately
need to love each other to get over
these, uh, systemic societal travails
that we that that love is what's
missing. Here's the problem. You can't
love if your brain is inflamed.
You can't love if you can't love
if your brain is inflamed.
Of course, the reason for the inflamed
brain is the ultrarocessed food and all
the things we talked about, the reactive
oxygen species, the cortisol, etc. that
we talked about before. So, are you
saying people that are metabolically
unhealthy that are have inflamed brains
that are under stress
have a reduced ability to love? Yes,
it's exactly what I'm saying.
They can't love themselves and they
can't love anyone around them.
>> Explain the science there.
>> Serotonin.
>> What is serotonin?
>> Serotonin is a neurotransmitter
that is necessary for udeimmonia, for
being able to be content. Oxytocin is
the love neurotransmitter, the
reproduction neurotransmitter, the
safety neurotransmitter. Okay. the
cortisol
causes uh the uh methylation of the
oxytocin receptor. So now the oxytocin
can't work. So you can't feel safe.
And the serotonin is necessary to
basically suppress that inflammation in
the amygdala that's actually causing
the buckshot that you know the uh the
inability to surgically strike. like we
talked about before being that lousy
point guard.
So I said to him, "You can't love if
your brain is inflamed." And he thanked
me and he, you know, I thought that was
the end of that and I'm not going to
bother him anymore.
Two weeks ago, I got an email from Vivic
saying, "I've thought about what you
said and I'm halfway through your book
and let's talk."
>> You can't love if your brain is
inflamed. I was just looking at a study
that says high cortisol levels in a mum
during pregnancy can affect the baby's
oxytocin receptors, meaning they'll feel
less safe.
>> Exactly. Right.
And it's epigenetic. It happens even
before birth.
>> I'm trying to play out so I'm trying to
form a couple of hypotheses here around
what this might mean in practice. So I
mean in the case of the mother, if the
mother was under a lot of stress that
resulted in cortisol, then the baby's
oxytocin receptors, which are the
bonding chemical of of h within humans,
the bonding hormone is going to be
depleted. So if I had a really stressful
mother during
um my conception whatever that
>> during pregnancy yeah
>> there's a probability there's a causal
probability that I might be less good at
bonding with people
>> there we are that's exactly what we're
saying
>> but I guess also that can take place
after pregnancy whereas chronically
>> stress it's a it's a continual process
the question is can it be undone and the
answer is yes but
a lot of work
and you have to have the baseline
substrate
to be able to do it. There's a bit of um
what's the what's the term when
something becomes a little bit
self-fulfilling where it kind of
>> tautology
>> what I'm saying is if someone's lonely
extremely lonely and they are in a
single apartment alone which is
increasingly a lot of people
>> yes
>> then I basement
>> yeah but even even in major cities like
London and New York etc so many people
live in a little shoe box alone um and I
saw the studies that show the average
person used to x amount of friends to
turn to in a time of crisis. Now they
have on average it says like one or
zero. So loneliness is up. And then I
also saw some research that said when
people are lonely their body goes into a
state where they sleep worse, they're
more stressed. They're they're more uh
bitter
>> to people.
>> Yes.
>> And I can't remember the term for that,
but it's like it's like this heightened
sensitivity. And the thesis is that once
upon a time in an evolutionary context,
if you were if you lost your tribe, you
would have to be more on edge to
survive.
>> That's your amydala.
>> And if that's the case, then it means
that it would suggest that if you're
lonely, you're higher stress. Yes.
>> But if you're higher stress, you're more
likely to be lonely.
>> That's right.
>> Which is
>> that's the vicious cycle.
>> A vicious cycle. That's the term I was
looking for.
>> That's the vicious cycle. Absolutely. I
couldn't agree more.
>> That's what we're trying to undo. So
here's a question for you. Quiz. Yeah.
>> All right. And you know the answer.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Because I've mentioned it already
on this podcast.
>> All right. You ready?
>> Yeah.
>> What is the difference between
loneliness and solitude?
>> Loneliness is
a lack of human connection and solitude
is being alone.
>> Well, both have a lack of human
connection.
>> I don't know. Tell me the answer. What's
the answer?
>> Serotonin.
>> Okay. If you're serotonin depleted,
you're lonely. If you're serotonin
replete, it's solitude. You're
comfortable in your loneliness.
You're happy that you're lonely
because you're not really lonely. You're
alone.
>> And how does that happen that I become
lonely and in terms of the serotonian
mechanism?
>> Well, you choose to be alone when you're
in solitude. But the point is that's
what you um want. That's what you chose.
You could be with other people. You've
chosen to be in solitude when you're
lonely. Okay. The reason even when
people are coming at you, even when
you're at a party and you are clearly
not lonely, you feel like you are. You
feel like you're there all by yourself
even though all these people are around
you.
>> What is serotonin?
>> That's and that's because you're
serotonin depleted. Serotonin is a
neurotransmitter. It's made from a amino
acid called tryptophane. Tryptophane is
the rarest amino acid in all of the
proteins that we ingest. It's the rarest
amino acid on the planet. It's found in
eggs, chicken, fish, not exactly
ultrarocessed food. So people who eat
ultrarocessed food at high rate are
going to be tryptophane deficient and
therefore serotonin deficient, are going
to be somewhat irritable and also
somewhat lonely. And what it does is it
inhibits the next neuron. It causes the
next neuron not to fire instead of
dopamine which causes the next neuron to
fire. They are very different. And
serotonin when it's at normal dose gives
you a feeling of contentment,
not necessarily happiness, but this
feels good. I don't want or need
anymore.
>> So it's almost the opposite of dopamine.
It's the exact opposite of dopamine.
Dopamine is this feels good, I want
more. And serotonin is this feels good,
I don't want or need anymore.
>> And serotonin is predominantly made in
the gut, 90%.
>> So 90% is made in the gut. The question
is does the gut serotonin get to the
brain? And the answer is through the
afrant nerve. So that aphrrent vagus has
to be functional and has to basically
conduct information from the gut up to
the brain in order to be able to
transduce that. That is what we call
intuition. That is called gut feeling.
>> So I need my vagus nerve to be healthy.
>> Yes, you do. Yes, you do. And there are
a lot of things that are causing that
vag nerve not to be healthy, including
all of the gut inflammation that we
talked about from the ultrarocessed
food. So, how do I make my Vegas nerve
healthy?
>> Eat real food.
>> What about those Vegas nerve stimulators
that everyone's banging on about?
>> So, they're interesting and they do have
benefits for seizure control.
Okay. For seizures, um the uh vagus
nerve uh for some reason transduces
information up and down that help
mitigate seizures.
No one's been able to demonstrate, to my
knowledge, that you can use a veagal
nerve stimulator to actually change
emotion.
>> I was looking at the research and it
says exactly what you described that a
meta analysis and long-term follow-ups
show a 30 to 50%
reduction in seizures for patients who
use veagal nerve stimulation. But
outside of that, in terms of depression,
the evidence is
>> modest,
>> meager,
>> meager. Yeah. around 15 to 25% show
which is above placebo. So it's small.
Uh and then with anxiety it's the same.
There's not there's only low quality and
small scale work. They do say though
that implanted vagus nerve stimulators
show the strongest evidence for epilepsy
and depression. But the bottom line is
um it works well for seizures as you
said um and there's still a lot unproven
as it relates to stress. Yeah. And
focus.
>> I wish they worked. I mean it would be
an easy you know you know and one thing
you learn from doing doing what I do
with this podcast is you learn that in
life there are really not many shortcuts
and everything that appears to be a
shortcut some device some contra
contraption that's going to fix things
actually either doesn't work is a scam
or has some hidden trade-off
>> right
>> and so it goes back to this really
important principle that I think
everybody listening should embody which
is there's no free lunch in life. If it
appears to be the the fast way, it's
probably fast way to something else. Uh,
and the slow way is the fast way. The
hard way is the fast way. This is kind
of what I've learned. Like I can try all
these things to try and trick to try and
not, you know, to try and be able to eat
sugar but be healthy.
>> And there's always some
trade-off. Like even a Zmpeek.
>> Exactly.
>> Everyone's talking about Zmp.
>> It's a band-aid, not a fix.
>> What do you think of a Zenek?
>> How much time you got? All right. Well,
depends what you think.
>> People ask me this all the time. Um, I
wear three hats. Okay. So, I'll put my
first hat on, my clinician hat. I'm glad
they're here. These GLP1 analoges, they
do work. I'm not saying they don't. They
do. And God knows if you have a BMI of
40 to 45 and you have tried everything
else and nothing else works and it's a
matter of life and death, then I am glad
they're here. All right. All right. Now,
let me put my second hat on. My
scientist hat. Okay. Why do they work?
They work in two places. They work
actually at that nucleus encumbent which
I mentioned before, the reward center.
It actually seems to reduce reward. It's
one of the reasons why GLP1 analoges are
not just being used for obesity, but for
alcoholism, for drug addiction,
for many things, because they're
basically putting that reward system to
rest, which is a good thing.
Now we had a drug that did that back in
2006. Put that reward system to rest. It
was called Ramanabant
trade name Amplia. And what it was was
an anti-
endocinabonoid.
It was an endockinabonoid receptor
antagonist. It was the anti-marijuana
drug. It was the anti-munchies
drug. And so it caused weight loss. and
it got released in the European Union.
The EFSA approved it in 2006 and within
two months of its hitting the market,
there were 21 suicides.
Okay? And the reason is because if you
suppress reward, ain't no reason to get
out of bed in the morning.
Okay? Now, the good news with these GLP1
analoges is we've been looking for the
suicide signal and haven't seen it. But
we also looking for the depression
signal and we see that a lot. So it does
seem to be having the same effect. Maybe
not as severe as Romanoband but
nonetheless that's a downside for sure.
Okay. Now the second place it works GI
tract. It delays gastric emptying. It
slows food going through the elementary
canal especially the stomach. Okay?
That's why it works because you can't
eat more if your stomach's still full
because it didn't move it along. Okay,
that's good. Sort of. Except it gives
you all the side effects. The nausea,
the vomiting, the pancreatitis, the
gastroparasis.
Stomach turns to stone. 3.4% of all
people who take GLP-1 analoges get
gastroparasis.
And guess what? When you stop the med,
the gastroparasis doesn't go away.
And there is a lawsuit against Novo
Nordisk right now over gastroparasis
from GLP1 analoges. Not so good. In
addition,
you lose weight. Okay. What kind of
weight? Turns out half muscle, half fat.
Now, losing fat's good. Losing muscle is
not. Losing muscle is actually a risk
factor for early demise. Sarcopenia is a
risk factor for early demise. Now, what
else causes loss of equal amounts of
muscle and fat? Starvation. And that's
how the damn medicines work. They're
causing you to starve. Well, that's not
the best way to do this, people.
Also,
only one-third of people who take GOP1
analoges actually respond. Twothirds
don't. They don't tell you about those.
They're only telling you about the
responders. And as soon as you stop
taking it, all the weight comes rushing
back plus some because you've only
bandated the problem. You haven't fixed
the problem. Also, not such a great
thing. And then finally, let me switch
to my third hat, my public health
advocate hat. Now, I did say these drugs
work. 16% mean weight loss. True. Okay.
If everyone in America
who qualified for a GLP-1 analog got it,
that would be $2.1 trillion to the
health care system, which is currently
4.1 trillion. So that would be a 50% sir
charge over what we're currently paying.
And Medicare is going to go broke by the
year 2029 anyway without it. So you're
going to put another 50% on top of that?
How the hell are you going to pay for
that for a 16% weight loss? Conversely,
if we just got added sugar out of the
diet, out of the American diet to the
level of USDA guidelines of 12 teaspoons
of added sugar per day, no more.
We could get a 29% weight loss and save
$3.0 trillion. That's a $5.1 trillion
swing for double the weight loss and no
side effects. Which one do you think is
better?
>> Yeah,
>> that's how I feel about it. There was um
there was a recent animal research study
that suggested that things like a Zmpeek
semiglutides reduced cocaine self
administration in rats by roughly 30%
during treatment and cut their drug
seeking behavior by 62% after a period
of abstinence
>> which speaks to some of the things you
were saying there about JLP1 asex role
in the reward pathways in the brain.
>> Y
>> so
>> it's interesting
>> it's interesting but what is that
saying? It's saying that if you in these
rats, if they were given these GLP1
antagonist, these isex, these
semiglutides,
>> they were less likely to be addicted
to things.
>> Yeah. I mean,
>> I wouldn't say less likely to be
addicted. They're already addicted.
They're they're basically choosing not
to continue to consume.
>> And again,
>> we don't know if they're addicted.
They're rats. But their behaviors
suggest that they're reducing the
consumption of the addictive substance.
>> And what what is this suggesting? This
means that
>> the JLP1 is doing what?
>> Well, number one, maybe the reason that
they're not consuming more is because
their stomachs aren't moving.
If your stomach's not moving, you don't
want to take any more, do you?
>> Maybe. Yeah.
>> Maybe it's that we don't know. That's
one possibility. Uh there are no there's
no question that the nucleus encumbent
has GLP-1 receptors. The vententral
tegmental area has GLP-1 receptors. And
I actually gave a talk at the um
California Society of Addiction Medicine
on OMPIC. So we know what, you know, the
the data show. We're still, you know,
researching this and trying to
investigate, figure out what it is. You
know, it that also wouldn't explain the
alcohol story because alcohol is not um
food, you know. It's it's liquid. So
it's, you know, it's a little different
and it definitely reduces alcoholism uh
uh alcohol consumption. So there does
seem to be an effect. Understanding what
dopamine does from what you said
earlier, it would appear that then these
like GLP1s, the Zmpex are dampening
dopamine's release in some way because
the rats when you talked about
motivation um and dopamine, the rats are
less motivated to go and get more
cocaine.
>> Correct.
>> And and that very well may be a good
thing. And for certain people, I think
we can absolutely use that uh phenomenon
to assist them.
>> Is that
>> perhaps that will be a good way to help
with drug interdiction?
>> Could that also mean that I become less
motivated period?
>> Yes.
>> Ah, that's not good.
>> Yes, that's what I'm worried about.
>> Going back to Jenny and Dave, Jenny and
Dave both have a little bit of extra
weight on them. We've talked about
really interestingly the whole idea that
serotonin, connection, love plays in a
tremendous role. um and stress.
And so Jenny and Dave now, they're going
to be thinking about their relationships
and friendships and going to that run
club as a way to help them downstream
with addictions and other things they're
struggling with. Is there anything else
that Jenny and Dave, who represent the
typical American, need to know to maybe
shed some of that body fat?
>> Number one,
ultrarocessed food is obesogenic.
Now,
if Jenny and Dave are under stress, if
Jenny and Dave are under financial
stress, if Jenny and Dave are under time
stress,
it's going to be really hard for them to
turn away from ultrarocessed food.
So, don't expect their weight to get any
better
>> until they fix their diet. The one thing
I am very sure of is that if you keep
eating the same
don't expect anything good to happen.
>> But it's hard.
>> It's very hard. Some practical types of
things. The first thing is that when
they go to the store,
>> Yeah.
>> don't go hungry.
>> Okay. Love that.
>> That's the first one.
>> I make that mistake a lot.
>> All right. The second thing,
>> why? Let's give some context there.
>> Oh, because if they're hungry, all bets
are off. They're done.
>> Because they're more likely to reach for
the bad stuff.
>> For bad stuff. because the bad stuff's
calling to them. And by the way, the bad
stuff's on the end caps of each of the
aisles of the grocery store.
>> And in the middle,
>> in the middle, well, any if you've gone
into the aisles, you've gone off the
rails because that's where the
ultrarocessed food is.
>> So, shop around the outside, which
>> have to shop around the outside, which
is where the real food is,
>> the fridges and
>> the fridges and the produce and the
meats and the dairy. Okay? Mhm.
>> Not to say that there isn't, you know,
ultrarocessed food and sugar hiding in
those places too, but if you've gone
into the, you know, uh, standard, you
know, aisles, um, you know, that's where
all the ultrarocessed food is hiding.
And, you know, 73% of the items in the
American grocery store are poison.
So, if you go into the grocery store,
you already have a problem.
>> So, the first one is don't go hungry.
The second one is to
>> stay on the outside of the
>> supermarket.
>> Yeah. Anything else for Jenny and Dave?
>> And most importantly, uh, you know, I
don't want them to have to read food
labels because that's kind of, you know,
out of bounds. Okay. But they should
basically um, if a food has a label,
it's a warning label.
That's how they should look at it. Okay.
And if a and if any if any food has a
sugar in the first three items, the
first three ingredients, it's dessert.
That's how they should look at it.
So, you know, Chinese chicken salad is
dessert.
>> I, you know, the other day I looked at
my friend was drinking a can of um
Coca-Cola.
>> Mhm.
>> And I picked it up and I I thought, you
know, I've not seen one of these in a
while. And I looked at the the back of
it and it said the sugar quantity in it
was something like 40% in that region.
>> So it was 39 grams in a in a can. Yeah.
No, it's right.
>> I was like, so 40% of it
>> is sugar
>> is just sugar.
>> Correct.
>> And people are just
>> There you go.
>> No wonder.
>> That's why we have a fatty liver disease
pandemic.
>> And sugar's sugar's fundamentally linked
to things like cancer as well, right?
>> Yes. Absolutely.
And we know why now we know how you know
through what mechanisms.
>> What are what are the mechanisms
>> for cancer?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So first of all ins anything that
makes insulin go up in increases your
risk for cancer because insulin is a
growth factor. Okay. Secondly because
insulin causes mitochondrial
dysfunction. Okay. It increases these
other phenomena like for instance the
pentos phosphate shunt and the um uh
randle cycle and the denoval lipogenesis
which is what cancer cells need to be
able to multiply and divide. Okay, so
it's basically feeding the cancer.
Number three, certain cancers,
particularly pancreatic cancer, have an
enzyme in them called transits. And what
that can do is that can take fructose
and turn it into glucose in the cancer
cell only. So that when you're actually
consuming sugar, you are feeding the
cancer specifically. Yet what what do we
give cancer patients? Ensure, which is
like straight fructose. So you are
actually feeding the cancer. So that
that that's like ridiculous. Okay. In
addition, because fructose interferes
with mitochondrial function, okay, that
sends a feedback mechanism to the rest
of the cell to divide
because dividing cells are in growth
phase. They don't have mitochondria.
That's why cancer cells don't have
mitochondria. That's why fetal cells
don't have mitochondria. Anorobes don't
have mitochondria. They grow the
fastest, you know, provided that the
conditions are right. So bottom line,
anything that interferes with
mitochondrial function puts you at risk
for cancer.
>> And are we seeing cancer is growing
there? The incidence of people getting
cancer is that's growing.
>> Oh, absolutely. And people getting
cancer earlier and earlier especially
colctal cancer. My god, you know the
mean age of colorctal cancer used to be
50 to 55.
It is now we are seeing patients with
you know colurectal cancer in their 30s
and early 40s.
This is why
>> because of because of
>> because of sugar. That's a huge problem.
>> It is a huge problem.
>> So that's what I would suggest Dave and
Jenny do to start. Okay. But ultimately
they have to get their sugar and
ultrarocessed food consumption under
control. And the question is can they do
it alone?
Chances are to be honest with you they
probably can't. And the reason is
because they're sugar addicted and
because the food industry's basically
made it impossible for them to avoid.
That's what we have to fix. We have to
allow them the capability of being able
to access real food. This is why I'm so
upset with what's going on with this uh
argument here in the United States over
SNAP. Are you familiar with SNAP?
>> No.
>> SNAP is the Supplementary Nutrition
Assistance Program, SNAP,
also known as food stamps.
Okay,
I actually testified in front of
Congress, in front of the House
Appropriations Committee last year to
fix SNAP
now to get soda off SNAP
because soda is like the worst thing and
it's also the thing that most people use
their SNAP dollars, you know, their SNAP
vouchers to uh to purchase and it's
killing
And so I don't think soda should be on
SNAP. And so what I did was I testified
basically explaining the science, you
know, in Congress. And I said that what
we need to do is take the money that by
banning soda sales on SNAP. If people
want to spend their own money on soda,
that's their business. But we shouldn't
be, you know, using a federal government
subsidy program to subsidize their
death. We should take the money that's
saved from the soda sales and utilize it
to improve the nutrition of those same
people, you know, real vegetables,
dietary supplements, uh, fiber, water,
okay, things that will be healthy for
them. In other words, divert the monies.
They didn't hear that. The Republicans
are trying to basically gut snap.
They're trying to get rid of it as an
entity entirely. And if they don't can't
gut it, they will basically make it so
that they take the soda away, which is
good except it's not going to improve
their the rest of their nutrition
because they're basically just going to
take that money and repocket it. So, how
you, you know, set these uh legislation
uh uh uh agenda items up is super
important. And right now this
government's not doing it.
>> Just give me 15 seconds to explain how
you can build a viable business online.
The people I see winning in life don't
have a perfect plan. They just take the
first step and then the next and then
they keep going. They stay obsessed and
they stay consistent. And Standtore, a
platform I co-own and one of our
sponsors is the best first step to help
turn your knowledge into income. It only
takes a couple of minutes to launch your
business and start selling digital
products, coaching, memberships, or
communities online without any tech
headaches or endless setup. Thousands of
entrepreneurs, creators, and risktakers
use Stan to take control of their
future. Because Stan is for
entrepreneurs, for those willing to put
in the work and bet on themselves. If
you're ready to start building, join us.
Launch your business today with a free
14-day trial at
stephvenbartlet.stan.store.
the the messages and emails that you get
from people that have heard you on
podcasts or have read your books or seen
your work in other places. What is the
the typical question that those people
asked? If you had to summarize the
question into one question, what is it
that people ask you the most?
>> Uh, is juice healthy?
>> Really
>> serious.
That's probably the most common
question. You say sugar is bad, but
isn't juice healthy?
>> Is juice healthy?
>> Juice is not healthy. Fruit is healthy.
So what's the difference between fruit
and juice? The fiber.
Okay, fruit has fiber. The fiber reduces
the rate of absorption from the gut into
the bloodstream.
And in doing so, you reduce the insulin
response, you reduce the glucose
response, you basically protect the
liver. And because you've prevented its
early absorption, it goes further down
the intestine where the microbiome can
chew it up for its own purposes, thus
feeding the gut and generating short-
chain fatty acids which are therefore uh
metabolically beneficial,
anti-inflammatory, anti- Alzheimer's.
Okay? And the fiber acts like little
scrubbies on the inside of the colon to
get rid of colon cancer cells. So you
get all sorts of benefits from the fiber
in the fruit, but as soon as you juice
it, you've thrown the fiber in the
garbage. And so all you now have is
sugar water. So eat the fruit, don't
drink the juice. Problem is that's you
know what that's not what the food
industry is selling.
>> What if I put the fruit in a blender and
then instead of throwing out the gunk, I
keep all the little bits in there. So
what happens is that the blades in the
Brevel or the Vitamix or the Neutra
Bullet or you know whatever you use to
make your smoothie, those blades are
shearing that fiber into smitherreens
into such short pieces that it can't
actually act as a lattice work to
sequester and prevent that absorption.
So the rate of absorption in the
intestine is just as fast and so the
fructose and the glucose will still get
to the liver just as uh uh fast as it
did before when it was juice. So that's
not the answer. So uh making a smoothie
out of it is not the answer. I was
looking at the top comments from our
last conversation and they're all
extremely
I'd say similar but they're they're all
incredibly inspiring. Someone here has
written the top comment which um I shall
pre I shall record the screen so Jack
can throw it on the screen. Says,
"Stephen, I discovered Robert 3 years
ago after my doctor told me I was
pre-diabetic. 3 years on, my blood
levels are completely normal and
everyone tells me how good I look
recently. This man should be on every TV
in the world, but the food industry is
trying to shut him up. Follow the work
and you will change your life like he
changed mine." Stuart J, 59 years old,
male in the UK. That's very heartening.
I'm glad to hear that. Good for you,
Stuart.
>> My friend was diagnosed with stage four
prostate cancer and given one year to
live. He found do Dr. Lustig and
rigorously followed his advice. Keto
diet, intermittent fasting, regular
walking. That was two years ago. He's
now in remission. The cancer is gone.
I was diagnosed with pre-diabetes,
fibromyalgia.
>> Mhm.
>> And decided to cut out all the sugar,
including fruit. Not only did I lose 60
pounds in under a year, but my pain went
from 10 to 1 to two.
>> Wow.
>> I had more energy, my A1C dropped to
normal levels, and I went from being
fully disabled to going back to work
full-time. Cutting out all the sugar is
hard. I won't lie. It's also a constant
constant battle, but it is so worth it.
Wow.
And lastly, I listened to this podcast
last year. I made a decision on December
the 28th, 2023 to stay away from all
candy, brownies, maple, walnut, scones,
and all desserts. You get the idea. It
is now approaching December 28th, 2024.
And besides re-watching this video, I
have made another commitment to do the
same thing I did last year. It's a shame
that 73% of what's in the aisles in the
grocery store have hidden sugar in it.
And so I haven't gotten radical about
it, but the changes I've made have made
me feel terrific.
Dr. Robert is the cat's meow and he has
a giant part of in me getting me back
purring. I'm 68 and play 5 days a week,
2 to four hours a day pickle ball.
>> Wow.
>> I love the choices I've made. I love
you, doctor.
>> A You know what? I love you, too.
And I'm 68.
Maybe May maybe when I go to the UK,
we'll have a date.
>> Well, that's Leslie. She's a She's quite
a pretty
>> Oh, very nice.
>> How does that make you feel?
>> Um,
very heartened.
>> I can see the the emotion in your face.
>> Yeah. No, very heartened. But, but you
know, the problem is not fixed.
the problem's fixed for each of these
people, but the problem is not fixed.
And because the problem's not fixed, um
I still have a job to do. So, it it
gives me more um uh strength to do it.
It gives me more purpose and it gives me
more reason to do it, but you know, the
problem is not fixed.
>> Do you think one of the most impactful
things that we could all do for our
health is just to reduce our sugar
consumption? That'd be that's that's job
one. Okay. Uh there are many things, but
without question, that's the easiest
one. And to be honest with you, the food
industry should be helping us do that.
The only reason the sugars in the food
is because they wanted it there. They
put it there on purpose because they
knew when they add it, you buy more.
>> And exercise, how does that impact my
decision to reach for sugar or not reach
for sugar?
>> Well, it doesn't really impact your
desire. does desire to reach for sugar.
It has its own metabolic benefits. I'm
totally for exercise. Don't get me
wrong. I am completely for exercise.
Exercise does many good things, but
burning calories is not one of them.
Okay? People think, "Oh, uh, you know,
exercise to work off the donut that I
ate." Wrong.
Forget it. That's not what it's about.
What does exercise do? Exercise
increases mitochondria. And that's good
because you need increased mitochondrial
reserves in order to make all that ATP.
Exercise increases brain trophic factors
which are necessary for cognition. And
it's been shown now that exercise is one
of the primary u methods for mitigating
the risk for dementia. Okay. It
increases brain derived neurotrophic
factor. It increases leptin. All of
these are necessary to promote
synaptogenesis and even increase
neurogenesis, more neurons, you know, so
that they don't die. So, I'm all for
exercise. Exercise also increases muscle
mass and muscle mass, you know, uh is a
mitigating factor for early demise. Like
I said, sarcopenia is a risk factor for
early demise. So, exercise is the way to
undo that. Having said that, none of
that had anything to do with weight
loss. Okay? So, if you think exercise is
going to make you lose weight, you are
deluded. You are under a delusion. You
have adopted the calorie hypothesis. I
am here to dispel. I am here to destroy
the calorie hypothesis. A calorie is not
a calorie.
So many of the people that are listening
to this conversation right now, if
they're in the United States or if
they're in other parts of the world that
have similar health stats, are diabetic
or pre-diabetic. One in 10 people
worldwide have diabetes. And in the
United States, one in three to four of
adults that are listening right now are
pre-diabetic. Even if you don't have a
huge amount of fat on your body, you
>> It's actually 40%. Four out of 10,
>> which is crazy. Yeah,
>> that's right.
>> It means that almost half of the people
listening right now, whether you know it
or not, could well be pre-diabetic if
you fit into the statistics that we we
have here.
>> I mean,
terrifying.
>> Oh, yeah. So for those people that are
pre-diabetic that have just found out
because there was I asked this question
because there is a guy here that says
his doctor's just um told him he's
pre-diabetic and he's listening
listening to the show probably again.
>> So I wanted to offer him something. His
doctors just told him that he's
pre-diabetic. What should he be doing?
>> Right. First thing get rid of all
ultrarocessed food from your diet.
>> Okay.
>> And in the process you will have gotten
rid of all the sugar from your diet.
That's the first thing. see how that
works.
Okay? Spend two weeks doing just that.
If that works, fantastic. If that
doesn't work, add add some exercise.
Walk
your dog.
>> Okay. So, on the first point, should he
be using a glucose monitor to help him?
Because people can get on Amazon or
these other websites very, you know, $
20, $30, you can get a glucose monitor
for your arm.
>> Yeah. So I am for glucose monitors and
the reason is because they are a sub
substitute a proxy for insulin. When the
glucose goes up that means the insulin
goes up and it's the insulin that really
makes the difference. So we have
documentation of the fact that by
monitoring your own glucose
concentration you can see improvements
in metabolic health down the line. You
can food log. You can use the glucose
monitoring. You don't need to do glucose
monitoring. You can just do it with the
food logging and it will still work.
Bottom line, there are a whole bunch of
scientists who are against using glucose
monitors for non-diabetics and they
write about this routinely. They seem to
write about it always in the New York
Times.
I am completely 180 degrees opposite on
that. I think it is a very good idea.
The reason that they say it is a bad
idea is because if you're using the same
uh outcome variables as for diabetes,
time in range, time above range, time
below range, well, these are
non-diabetics. So, of course, all of
those numbers are going to be in the
center. They're going to be in the time
in range. So, it looks like there's no
benefit to that. Okay, that's not the
point. The point is the downstream
outcomes which come 3 months later.
They're not looking at that. We have
those data. We are looking at that and
the data are very good. Do
>> you know what Joe I think is really
really useful with those CGMs, those
continuous glucose monitors that you can
buy online super cheaply, is they just
educate you on the impact that different
foods you might have thought were
healthy, like the juices we talked
about,
>> like rice.
>> Yeah, like r Oh my god. White rice.
That's actually one of the big things I
learned. You know, there's two things
that shocked me. Three things that have
shocked me over the last couple of years
that I thought were healthy. Mh. So, I
grew up thinking that orange juices were
healthy. I I remember being a young kid
and getting the Sunny Delight out of the
the fridge and like gugging it because
I'd seen on the advert it said vitamin C
or something.
>> Yep.
>> And I thought, "Oh, vitamin C. Good.
Glug it." Um, I've come to learn
>> that was that that was their subtrifuge
and you were a victim.
>> I was a victim and I would like
compensation.
Sunny D. I think the entire uh you know
UK population US population deserves
compensation.
>> There's a young lady in the comment
section um who watched our conversation
last time. She said a quote from this
doctor that I loved and I've never
forgotten is any food that is linked to
a television commercial should not be
consumed. Brilliantly said and a great
boundary to put in place.
>> Yep, that's right.
>> Any food that is linked to a television
commercial should not be consumed. It's
so true. They don't put cucumbers in
television commercials.
>> Nope.
>> Not enough um uh uh marketing uh uh uh
money. Not enough uh u margin.
>> So Sunny D. So orange juices generally I
don't drink any juices anymore. I
haven't for years now. The other one was
white rice. I thought that was healthy
growing up. Thought it was really really
healthy. And then I did a continuous
glucose monitor with a company that I'm
an investor in called Vizoi. Yes. and
and it gave me this it was like it was
horrific the um impact on my like gut
microbiome and my my glucose levels. And
the third one was tomato ketchup.
>> I didn't know there was so much bloody
sugar.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah.
>> In in most ketchups.
>> In fact, Hines ketchup is half high
fructose corn syrup.
>> Madness. And that's the I think that's
the value of getting a continuous
glucose monitor, even if you just run it
for 14 days, is you'll learn your
relationship with these things. You
frequently eat, and most of us are
frequent eaters. We eat the same kind of
things. Um,
>> and you can make some trades. What is
the most important thing we haven't
talked about that we should have talked
about, Robert?
>> I know we haven't talked about
psychedelics.
>> What would you like to talk about with
psychedelics?
>> Psychedelics are serotonin.
a big dose, a big glug of serotonin all
at once. What serotonin does is it
provides you with this sense of
complacency, of udeimmonia, of
contentment.
Serotonin is necessary to rewire
areas of the brain. You can actually see
it on um on MRI. It's actually leading
to synaptic rewiring. Think of it this
way. So, can I just confirm that just on
one point? You're not you're not saying
that psychedelics create serotonin.
You're saying that they are the same.
>> They're serotonin mimicker.
>> Okay. Yeah.
>> They mimic serotonin.
>> Yeah.
>> Think of it this way. You live
uh on a mountain, okay, with snow and
you have to every week go down to the
general store at the base of the
mountain. and you ski down there. And
you ski down there and you ski down
there and the snow falls and you ski
down there and soon what you've done is
you've created ridges in the snow for
you to get down the hill and they freeze
and soon the only way to get down the
hill
is through the ridges that you've
created. You are now basically in a rut.
You have trapped into that path. There's
no other way out your house other than
those ridges that have frozen in place.
That's what's happening in your brain.
You can't unthink your way out of it
because that's the only way you know.
Psychedelics are like a huge enormous
blizzard filling in the ruts, filling in
the ridges. So, you end up with a
pristine, you know, uh, snowbank for you
to be able to basically ski any which
way you want. It's your way out of your
rut.
And what we have in America and UK too
is a whole lot of people with a set of
belief systems that have put them into
ruts that they can't think their way out
of. Now, can this be done without
psychedelics? Absolutely. But it's hard.
Psychedelics are a way to,
shall we say, hack that belief system
concept and allow you to rethink your
own life and the life of the um people
around you and how you interact with
them. And um we need more research in
this to solve mental illness and also uh
improve uh the u well-being of um you
know sizable proportion of the
population.
>> I'm I'm a big fan of uh the research
taking place with in the psychedelic
field. I actually spent a year of my
life in what I believe is the biggest
psychedelics company in the world as an
investor and then as a director um in a
capacity where I was helping to drive
fundraising through through marketing
and then the company is now a public
business that's doing a lot of the
clinical studies. So
>> which one is it?
>> It's a Thai life sciences.
>> Uhhuh.
>> I obviously Compass Pathways as Well,
I'm an investor in that company and uh
>> I'm a big fan of what MAPs are doing as
it relates to using these these
molecules for mental health disorders
and treatment resistant depression,
PTSD, anxiety, etc. And it's so shocking
to me that that you know, it's taken so
long to
>> Yeah. Well, you know, they got a bad rap
from Nixon, you know, back in the 1970s.
And I understand why. By the way, no one
should do psychedelics alone.
>> Yeah.
>> You do them with a guide. you do them
with someone you completely trust
where safety is paramount
>> and um uh they can be really remarkable.
>> And we talk about set and setting which
is hopefully we'll they'll be done in
clinical settings with a as you say with
a practitioner.
>> Yes. That's the only way they should be
done.
>> Dr. Robert, we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next not
knowing who they're leaving it for.
>> I knew it was coming.
>> Yes, you did. Yeah.
>> Looking at your life and the lives of
others, how would you describe the
journey of life and how to approach it?
When you come out of the box, when
you're born,
okay,
you already have
neurons and synapses and neural pathways
that have developed. Even though you've
had no experience,
the experience will either solidify
those or destroy them.
Ultimately, those turn into belief
systems.
Almost every belief system that you
thought you understood
about how the world works
is wrong.
You have to be open
to the fact that all the things you
thought were true aren't.
And if you are if you are that open with
yourself, you will know yourself. And if
you know yourself, you can be happy.
But if you,
you know, believe your belief systems
and you never question them,
you're never going to get there.
Amen. Robert, thank you so much. You're
I mean, you know, I say to some people
sometimes at the end of these podcasts
that they're doing good in the world,
but you're quite frankly saving a lot of
people's lives. I mean, the fact that
all the top comments on the video seem
to be dominated by the same narrative
that you've saved someone's life, you've
improved their life is I mean, is there
any higher work one can do with their
life than improve the quality and
duration and health of someone else's
life? And that's exactly what you're
doing. It's what you've done through
your public advocacy work. I know you
recently spent some time with Prince
Charles in the UK, which is incredibly
exciting, the the King of England, um
talking to him about health outcomes and
all of the work that you've been doing.
And it's what an honor it is to be
invited by him to, you know, him asking
for your opinions and your your
perspective on on health, which I know
is something that's quite close to the
heart of of the king. And then through
these books, these incredible books that
I have in front of me here, which I'm
going to link all of them below, this
one's a this one's new, right? So, this
was
>> it's coming out September 16th.
>> Okay. So, that will be out by the time
the conversations, I believe.
>> And these incredible books, I mean,
there's so many of them that I can't
pick a favorite child, but um they're
all incredible depending on what where
people are at in their lives and what
they're trying to understand. Robert,
thank you so much.
>> It's been a my pleasure.
>> Make sure you keep what I'm about to say
to yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you
to come even deeper into the diary of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behind the scenes
conversations with the guests and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released and so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private closed
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you then.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribe to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guests
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much.
Heat. Heat. N.
[Music]